
h2(#contentAssist). Content Assist

The Xtext generator, amongst other things, generates the following two content assist (CA) related artifacts:

* an abstract proposal provider class named _Abstract[Language]ProposalProvider_ generated into the _src-gen_ folder within the _ui_ project
* a concrete sub-class in the _src_-folder of the _ui_ project called _[Language]ProposalProvider_

First we will investigate the generated _Abstract[Language]ProposalProvider_ with methods that look like this:

h3. ProposalProvider

bc.. public void complete[TypeName]_[FeatureName](
  EObject model, 
  Assignment assignment, 
  ContentAssistContext context, 
  ICompletionProposalAcceptor acceptor) {
  // clients may override
}

public void complete_[RuleName](
  EObject model, 
  RuleCall ruleCall, 
  ContentAssistContext context, 
  ICompletionProposalAcceptor acceptor) {
  // clients may override
}

p. The snippet above indicates that the generated ProposalProvider class contains a _complete*_-method 
for each assigned feature in the grammar and for each rule. The brackets are place-holders that should 
give a clue about the naming scheme used to create the various entry points for clients. The generated 
proposal provider falls back to some default behavior for cross-references and keywords. Furthermore 
it inherits the logic that was introduced in reused grammars. 

Clients who want to customize the behavior may override the methods from the 
_AbstractProposalProvider_ or introduce new methods with a specialized first parameter. The framework 
dispatches method calls according to the current context to the most concrete implementation, that 
can be found.

It is important to know, that for a given offset in a model file, many possible grammar elements exist. 
The framework dispatches to the method declarations for any valid element. That means, that a bunch 
of _complete*_ methods may be called.

h3. Sample Implementation

To provide a dummy proposal for the description of a model object, you may introduce a specialization 
of the generated method and implement it as follows. This will give 'Description for model #7' for a 
model with the intAttribute '7'

bc.. public void completeModel_StringDescription (
  Model model, 
  Assignment assignment, 
  ContentAssistContext context, 
  ICompletionProposalAcceptor acceptor) {
  // call implementation in superclass
  super.completeModel_StringDescription(
    model, 
    assignment, 
    context, 
    acceptor);

  // compute the plain proposal
  String proposal = "Description for model #" + model.getIntAttribute();

  // convert it to a valid STRING-terminal
  proposal = getValueConverter().toString(proposal, "STRING");

  // create the completion proposal
  // the result may be null as the createCompletionProposal(..) methods 
  // check for valid prefixes
  // and terminal token conflicts
  ICompletionProposal completionProposal = 
    createCompletionProposal(proposal, context);

  // register the proposal, the acceptor handles null-values gracefully
  acceptor.accept(completionProposal);
}
