---
layout: post
title:  Xtext 2.9 Release Candidate
date:   2015-11-11
author: Sven Efftinge
categories: news
---

A release candidate of the upcoming version of Xtext can now be tried and tested. 
The Eclipse plugins are available through the milestone update site:

  [http://download.eclipse.org/modeling/tmf/xtext/updates/composite/milestones/](http://download.eclipse.org/modeling/tmf/xtext/updates/composite/milestones/)
  
The IntelliJ IDEA Plugins are available through this repository URL:

  [http://download.eclipse.org/modeling/tmf/xtext/idea/2.9.0.rc1/updatePlugins.xml](http://download.eclipse.org/modeling/tmf/xtext/idea/2.9.0.rc1/updatePlugins.xml)
  
You need to add that URL as a repository in IDEA and choose all three plugins (org.eclipse.xtext, org.eclipse.xtext.xtext and org.eclipse.xtend),
because IDEA doesn't pull-in dependencies automatically.

### When Is The Release?

If everything goes smoothly and noone reveals major issues in this release candidate (please try hard!), 
we hope to get out the release on _December 1st_.
  
### What's new?

#### IntelliJ IDEA As An Alternative To Eclipse
In addition to the existing Eclipse integration, it is now possible to design languages entirely in IntelliJ IDEA, as well.
Languages developed in Eclipse can target all available platforms (Eclipse, IntelliJ IDEA (new), Web editors (new)) while when
working in IDEA it is not possible to develop an Eclipse plug-in for you language. IDEA is just not so well suited for Eclipse Plug-in development.

_Also note: This doesn't mean we are dropping Eclipse support, nor are we going to think of that any time soon!_

#### Headless Builds For Xtext Projects
No matter what IDE you choose for development, or what target platforms for your language you want you'll get a fully working build based on Maven and/or Gradle.
So your Xtext projects can be built and published in any headless Java environment. That's why one essentially really doesn't need a particular
tool to develop Xtext languages anymore. That said, it's recommended to use them anyway :).

#### New Project Wizard
The new wizard runs in both Eclipse and IntelliJ IDEA and lets you choose, whether you want to have 
editor support at all (yes you can just focus on the compiler) and what build-systems you prefer.

#### Web Support
One of two new target platforms is web editor support for Xtext languages. With Eclipse Orion, Ace, and Code Mirror, we already support three different JS editors.
Each with a slightly different set of features and requirements. Check out [Miro's blog post](http://spoenemann.blogspot.de/2015/05/editing-dsls-in-web-browser.html) on how to give it a spin.

#### Language Editors for IntelliJ IDEA
The other new editor target platform is IntelliJ IDEA. We even developed a [full gradle integration](https://github.com/xtext/xtext-gradle-plugin/tree/master/xtext-idea-gradle-plugin) to build, test and run
the developed IDEA plugins.

#### All New Code Generator
We finally managed to rewrite the old Xtext code generator entirely in Xtend.
It's now much simpler, faster and more convenient to use and more fun to maintain :).

#### New Grammar Language Features
The Xtext Grammar Language got some new features, to reduce redundancy in more complex grammars such as an ECMAScript 6 IDE
we help a customer with. [Sebastian has written](http://zarnekow.blogspot.de) about some of them.

#### Many More Fixes And Improvements
As if that wasn't enough new stuff, we of course have also more than 200 issues on the go.
The [detailed list](https://bugs.eclipse.org/bugs/buglist.cgi?bug_status=RESOLVED&bug_status=VERIFIED&bug_status=CLOSED&f0=OP&f1=OP&f3=CP&f4=CP&j1=OR&list_id=13155507&query_format=advanced&status_whiteboard=v2.9&status_whiteboard_type=allwordssubstr) can be found in our bug tracker.


