---
layout: post
title:  XtextCON 2015 - Final Program Online
date:   2015-03-31
author: Sven Efftinge
categories: news
---

We are happy to announce the final program for XtextCON 2015. The conference now features 34 sessions with 27 speakers from different countries. Here is an excerpt of lately added sessions:

 - _Oomph, Eclipse the Way You Want It_ (Ed Merks, Eike Stepper),
 - _Xtext editors in JavaFX applications_ (Tom Schindl),
 - _The Future of Xtext_ (Sven Efftinge, Sebastian Zarnekow)

The conference also covers graphical diagramming topics, such as:
 - _Enhancing Graphical Editors with Xtext_ (Miro Spönemann),
 - _Lightweight Diagrams for Your DSLs_ (Christian Schneider),
 - _Graphical Views with FXDiagram_ (Dr. Jan Köhnlein)

In addition to those technical sessions, there will be case studies from different industries, e.g.:
 - _Model based migration of legacy software_ (Arjan Mooij),
 - _Sustainable Service Design through Xtext_ (Dr. Michael Bischoff),
 - _EAI and Xtext DSLs_ (André Lehner, Dietmar Stoll)

There is much more to discover [on the website](http://xtextcon.org). And don't forget to register!

Xtext Clinic
------------

In addition to the conference program, the Xtext committers will again run the Xtext Clinic. This is an offer to the attendees to make an appointment for a one hour session, where individual Xtext-related problems and challenges can be discussed and solved. The clinic has been utilised a lot last year with very positive feedback. 
So in case you are going, don't hesitate and make an appointment!

Hope to see you in May!
