---
layout: post
title:  Xtend 2.17.0 Release Notes
date:   2019-03-05
categories: releasenotes
published: false
---

This release focuses on stability, performance and the compatibility with Eclipse 2019-03.

## BOM

TODO

## Java 11

Xtend now supports Java 11 as target version.

## Removal of GWT

TODO

## xtend-maven-plugin

### Upgrade to Maven 3 API

The `xtext-maven-plugin` has been refactored to use the latest Maven 3 API. The most significant internal change is that all doclet based configurations have been changed to use Maven 3 annotation API.

### Faster startup

The plugin was using version ranges for some of its dependencies, especially Google Guava. Resolving the metadata of these ranged dependencies lead to a short time delay on execution of the plugin. All used dependency versions have been pinned to a single version, which speeds up the plugin execution.

### Resolve usage of deprecated API

The plugin has been refactored to resolve all usages of deprecated API from Eclipse Platform and m2e bundles. ([to issue](https://github.com/eclipse/xtext-xtend/issues/647))


## Quickfixes

### Quickfix for 'unused private member'

The _unused private member_ issue can now be resolved by a quickfix. The quickfix is capable to resolve multiple selected issues at once when selected from the _Problems_ view. ([details](https://github.com/eclipse/xtext-xtend/issues/671))


## Deprecations

### Deprecation of Android Archetype

The Maven archetype `org.eclipse.xtend.maven.android.archetype` has been deprecated with this version and is no longer published.

## Credits

The Xtend Language project is thankful for the dedication of each committer and contributor. This release has been made possible by the following persons (in order of the number of contributed commits):

- Christian Dietrich (itemis)
- Karsten Thoms (itemis)
- Holger Schill (itemis)
- Tamas Miklossy (itemis)
- Sebastian Zarnekow (itemis)
- Arne Deutsch (itemis)
- Prajwal Gowda (itemis)
- Eva Poell (itemis)
- Stéphane Galland


## Fixed Issues

As in every release cycle we were eagerly hunting down bugs, and reviewed and integrated plenty of contributions. More than TODO issues and almost TODO pull requests have made it into this release. For further details please refer to the following lists:

* [Fixed GitHub issues](https://github.com/search?utf8=%E2%9C%93&q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3ARelease_2.17+is%3Aclosed+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-core+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-lib+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-extras+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-eclipse+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-idea+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-web+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-maven+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-xtend&type=Issues&ref=searchresults)

* [Closed Pull Requests](https://github.com/search?utf8=%E2%9C%93&q=is%3Apr+milestone%3ARelease_2.17+is%3Aclosed+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-core+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-lib+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-extras+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-eclipse+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-idea+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-web+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-maven+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-xtend&type=Issues&ref=searchresults)

* [Fixed Eclipse Bugzilla tickets](https://bugs.eclipse.org/bugs/buglist.cgi?bug_status=RESOLVED&bug_status=VERIFIED&bug_status=CLOSED&classification=Modeling&classification=Tools&columnlist=product%2Ccomponent%2Cassigned_to%2Cbug_status%2Cresolution%2Cshort_desc%2Cchangeddate%2Ckeywords&f0=OP&f1=OP&f3=CP&f4=CP&known_name=Xtext%202.17&list_id=16618269&product=TMF&product=Xtend&query_based_on=Xtext%202.17&query_format=advanced&status_whiteboard=v2.17&status_whiteboard_type=allwordssubstr)
