---
layout: post
title:  Xtend 2.29.0 Release Notes
date:   2022-12-31
categories: releasenotes
published: false
---

Xtend 2.29.0 is a maintenance release.

## Call to Action: Secure the future maintenance of Xtext & Xtend

As you might have recognized, the number of people contributing to Xtext & Xtend on a regular basis has declined over the past years and so has the number of contributions. At the same time the amount of work for basic maintenance has stayed the same or even increased with the new release cadence of Java and the Eclipse simultaneous release. Briefly: The future maintenance of Xtext & especially Xtend is at risk, at least in the current form and as part of the Eclipse Simrel. If you care, please join the discussion in [https://github.com/eclipse/xtext/issues/1721](https://github.com/eclipse/xtext/issues/1721).

## Xtend and Java 17
Xtend now supports Java 17 as source and target, too. This requires newer Eclipse platform and JDT versions that do no longer run on Java 8. That's why the Xtend 2.29 compiler requires Java 11 as minimal Java version. While we were at it we also bumped the minimal tested Eclipse version to 2022-03 (2.28 was still compatible to and tested against Eclipse Oxygen).

Please Note: We did no special treatment for newer Java constructs in Xtend, so what works, works, what does not, does not - the latter being most likely intentional. Please engage by filing bugs or pull requests.

A feature that was removed in the course of the upgrade was the converter from Java code to Xtend code. It did not support new language features and in most cases we think it's more
suited to write Java instead of Xtend anyways. Xtend is great for code generators and our assumption is that most code generators couldn't be automagically translated to Xtend anyways.

## Changes / Enhancements

TODO

## Credits

The Xtend Language project is thankful for the dedication of each committer and contributor. This release has been made possible by the following persons (in order of the number of contributed commits to this release):

TODO

## Fixed Issues

As in every release cycle we were eagerly hunting down bugs, and reviewed and integrated plenty of contributions. For further details please refer to the following lists:

* [Fixed GitHub issues](https://github.com/search?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3ARelease_2.29+is%3Aclosed+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-xtend&type=Issues)

* [Closed Pull Requests](https://github.com/search?q=is%3Apr+milestone%3ARelease_2.29+is%3Aclosed+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-xtend&type=Issues)

* [Fixed Eclipse Bugzilla tickets](https://bugs.eclipse.org/bugs/buglist.cgi?bug_status=RESOLVED&bug_status=VERIFIED&bug_status=CLOSED&classification=Modeling&classification=Tools&columnlist=product%2Ccomponent%2Cassigned_to%2Cbug_status%2Cresolution%2Cshort_desc%2Cchangeddate%2Ckeywords&f0=OP&f1=OP&f3=CP&f4=CP&known_name=Xtext%202.29&list_id=16618269&product=TMF&product=Xtend&query_based_on=Xtext%202.29&query_format=advanced&status_whiteboard=v2.29&status_whiteboard_type=allwordssubstr)
