---
layout: post
title:  Xtend 2.26.0 Release Notes
date:   2022-01-31
categories: releasenotes
published: false
---

Xtend 2.26.0 is a maintenance release.

## Call to Action: Secure the future maintenance of Xtext & Xtend

As you might have recognized, the number of people contributing to Xtext & Xtend on a regular basis has declined over the past years and so has the number of contributions. At the same time the amount of work for basic maintenance has stayed the same or even increased with the new release cadence of Java and the Eclipse simultaneous release. Briefly: The future maintenance of Xtext & especially Xtend is at risk, at least in the current form and as part of the Eclipse Simrel. If you care, please join the discussion in [https://github.com/eclipse/xtext/issues/1721](https://github.com/eclipse/xtext/issues/1721).

## Xtend and Java 17

Xtend now supports running on Java 17 with Java 8 and 11 targets. Source and Target 17 are not supported yet and are planned for Xtext/Xtend 2.27.0. This will also require dropping Java 8 in the next release.

## Updates

TODO

## Enhancements

TODO

## Deprecations

- We will drop support for GWT in a future release.
- The next Xtend version will likely no long support Java versions below Java 11.

## Credits

The Xtend Language project is thankful for the dedication of each committer and contributor. This release has been made possible by the following persons (in order of the number of contributed commits to this release):

TODO

## Fixed Issues

As in every release cycle we were eagerly hunting down bugs, and reviewed and integrated plenty of contributions. For further details please refer to the following lists:

* [Fixed GitHub issues](https://github.com/search?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3ARelease_2.26+is%3Aclosed+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-xtend&type=Issues)

* [Closed Pull Requests](https://github.com/search?q=is%3Apr+milestone%3ARelease_2.26+is%3Aclosed+repo%3Aeclipse%2Fxtext-xtend&type=Issues)

* [Fixed Eclipse Bugzilla tickets](https://bugs.eclipse.org/bugs/buglist.cgi?bug_status=RESOLVED&bug_status=VERIFIED&bug_status=CLOSED&classification=Modeling&classification=Tools&columnlist=product%2Ccomponent%2Cassigned_to%2Cbug_status%2Cresolution%2Cshort_desc%2Cchangeddate%2Ckeywords&f0=OP&f1=OP&f3=CP&f4=CP&known_name=Xtext%202.26&list_id=16618269&product=TMF&product=Xtend&query_based_on=Xtext%202.26&query_format=advanced&status_whiteboard=v2.26&status_whiteboard_type=allwordssubstr)
